---
type: page
date: "2019-04-03T00:00:00Z"
title: "Kernel Programming (xv6) - Step 1, The Boot Process"
subtitle: Getting down with i386 assembler
draft: true
---

Gee, how time flies. I intended to update this blog weekly; well, I've
managed an update at an average of about once every two years. 

This post is a continuation of the XV6 exploration series. Several years ago, I wrote
some instructions to boot XV6 using Qemu. In this post, I'll dig into what is
happening under the hood, from power-on to the boot prompt.

The reader may find a basic knowledge of x86 assembler helpful,  but I'll attempt to give an overview of the
relevant op-codes and i386 architectural background. For further reading, I recommend
the book [Assembly Language Step by Step, Programming with Linux](http://www.duntemann.com/assembly.html) by Jeff Duntemann. 

{{< toc >}}

## X86 Platform Setup

Platform setup, the thing that happens between pressing the power switch on
your computer and being presented with, in the case of XV6, a blinking prompt,
is specific to processor (and indeed the broader computer system) architectures.

But at a basic level, the power switch triggers the CPU[^1] to
reset to a known starting state and begin fetching instructions from the _reset vector_
\- a hard-coded address that is CPU architecture-specific. Usually, the reset vector points to the start of the platform firmware. 

The CPU then executes the platform firmware; which may perform certain things like:
- Testing for the presence of DRAM, and training the memory controller to ascertain the appropriate timings for DRAM refresh/access rates.
- Performing a CPU self-test to ensure it's working as expected.
- Loading some data about the attached hardware devices into memory.
- Loading any configured _Option ROMs_ to provide early support for hardware devices (e.g. networking)

In the case of X86 processors - the power switch provides a signal on the
RESET input to the CPU (a physical pin on the chip), this resets the CPU to a
well-known state (one that is compatible with the 8086), and the CPU then starts
fetching the platform firmware code from _FFFF:0000h_. Again - depending on your platform and firmware,
several things may happen; in our case, we've instructed Qemu to emulate a
PC-BIOS system and configured it to boot from disk[^2]. The PC-BIOS will look at the first 512b sector of the configured boot device, checking for the special two-byte signature _0x55aa_ at offset _510b_. If the boot signature is found, the BIOS will load that sector to a fixed address and jump to it, handing off control to the next part of the boot chain.

### Real Mode's Historial Oddities

x86 CPUs are curious beasts; they contain lots of historical baggage. When x86 CPUs reset, they start in _real mode_. 
This mode limits the number and width of available general-purpose registers, limits
the amount of addressable main memory, and uses a _segmented_ rather than _flat_
memory addressing model.

Of course, one could write an operating system using the CPU in real mode, but if we did, we wouldn't be able to take full advantage of the hardware.
Additionally - it's often a pain to work using a segmented memory model, x86 CPUs support a simple flat addressing model with _paging_ for memory management instead of segmentation. Indeed, many C compilers don't support the segmented memory model; if you want to use C to write your OS kernel, you generally need to switch to a flat memory model. 

#### Available Register set.

Registers in real mode are limited to what was available back on the 8086:

* You get four 16-bit general-purpose registers to play with:
  * _ax_ - lower 8 bits addressable via _al_, upper 8 bits addressable via _ah_.
  * _bx_ - lower 8 bits addressable via _bl_, upper 8 bits addressable via _bh_.
  * _cx_ - lower 8 bits addressable via _cl_, upper 8 bits addressable via _ch_.
  * _dx_ - lower 8 bits addressable via _dl_, upper 8 bits addressable via _dh_.

* Four 'index registers', mostly general-purpose but unlike the above, can *only* be accessed as 16-bit registers and may have special meanings for some assembly instructions:
  * _si_ - Source Index
  * _di_ - Destination Index
  * _bp_ - Base Pointer
  * _sp_ - Stack Pointer 

* A register that tracks the instruction to be executed _ip_ - the Instruction Pointer.

* 16-bit _Segment Registers_, used for addressing code/data:
  * _cs_ - The Code Segement register
  * _ds_ - The Data Segment register
  * _ss_ - The Stack Segment register
  * _es_ - The _Extra_ Segment register


* A __flags_ register, used to store the result of comparison instructions or over/underflow on arithmetic instructions.


#### The Segmented Memory Model

Addresses are represented via a segment:offset combo[^3], with the segment loaded in a  _segment register_ and the offset provided by a separate general-purpose register or immediate operand. The address for a memory access is obtained by doing `Segment * 16 + Offset`, or in hexidecimal `Segment * 10h + Offset`. You will notice that multiplying by 16 in hexidecimal has the effect of simply shifting all the digits one place to the left, as an example taking our reset vector (_FFFF:0000h_), we get the following address: `0xFFFFh * 0x10h + 0x0 = 0xFFFF0h`.

>> TODO << 

#### The A20 Gate.

The first systems based on the intel 8086 were built with a 20bit address bus. Meaning up to 1 Megabyte (2^20) of Ram could be addressed, not bad for machines that would only be able to access up to 64k within a single segment. But there is a problem, our segmented memory model, where addresses are calculated as segegment*16 + offset, would let us create addresses outside that 20 bit range. Let's take, for example, the address `F001h:FFF0h`:

```
  F0010 
  0FFF0 +
 --------
 100000h
 ---------
```

So what happens when we try to access address `100000h`? Well, the upper pins of the address bus are connected to ground (or they don't exist), so in effect, the CPU looks at `100000h`, and instead sees a memory access for `00000h`, the address space simply wraps around to the beginning.

This was the case for several years, and so programs grew dependent on the address wrap-around behavior. Intel's 8086 successor, the 80286 did not maintain this wrap-around behavior, it supported a 24 bit address bus, no longer were we confined to 1MB of RAM!.  In order to maintain compatibility with old programs that depended on this wrap-around behavior, system manufacturers like IBM stuck a switch on the motherboard that was controllable via software; it would route the upper address pins to ground, preserving the legacy wrap-around behavior (until the switch was flipped in which case the full 16MB would be available). This switch is called the A20 Gate.


## The BIOS Hand-off, bootasm.S


So with the above in mind, the first job of the boot code that XV6 has is as follows (in no specific order):

- Set up the memory addressing mode to be flat with paging enabled.
- Enable the A20 Gate (an x86 quirk, doing this allows us to access memory >1MB).
- Load the rest of our operating system kernel into memory (we've only got 512 bytes remember!).
- Set up various descriptor tables.
- Transition into 32bit 'protected' mode (or 64bit 'long' mode).
- Jump to the next bit of our operating system code.

The first piece of executed XV6 code is `bootasm.S`. 


[^1]: On some SoCs or more exotic architectures, a different processing core like the GPU is what kicks off the boot proceess.
[^2]: PC-BIOS is rapidly becoming rather archaic, most PCs these days boot using the EFI or UEFI standard, while it is *possible* for QEMU to emulate a EFI based system, the boot protocol is slightly more complex and XV6 (and it's loader) was designed for PC-BIOS based systems.
[^3]: Like the reset vector address - _FFFF:0000h_.